Introducing XML Format. (#800)
cloudevents/spec: xml-format.md

# XML Event Format for CloudEvents

## Abstract

This format specification for CloudEvents defines how events are expressed
in XML documents.

## Status of this document

This document is a working draft.

## Table of Contents

1. [Introduction](#1-introduction)
2. [Attributes](#2-attributes)
3. [Data](#3-data)
4. [Envelope](#4-envelope)
5. [XML Batch Format](#5-xml-batch-format)
6. [References](#6-references)

## 1. Introduction

[CloudEvents][ce] is a standardized and protocol-agnostic definition of the
structure and metadata description of events. This specification defines how
elements defined in the CloudEvents specification are to be represented using
[Extensible Markup Language (XML)](xml-spec) documents.

* The [associated schema][xml-schema] formalizes the structure of the XML
document.

> * The [Attributes](#2-attributes) section describes the naming conventions and

Author: you're probably right .. to much cut-and-past on my part ;-)

data type mappings for CloudEvents context attributes.

* The [Data](#3-data) section defines the container for the data portion of a
CloudEvent.

* The [Envelope](#4-envelope) section defines an XML container for CloudEvents
attributes and an associated media type.

* The [Batch](#5-xml-batch-format) section describes how multiple CloudEvents
may be packaged into a single XML document.

### 1.1. Conformance

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in [RFC2119][rfc2119].

### 1.2 Approach

> This specification promotes an attribute heavy XML document style, such a model

Author: Ack ...

presents advantages in terms of parsing/processing along with a more compact
XML document representation.

> Attribute and Element names are deliberately terse for performance reasons.

Author: Ack

> Preservation of attribute value type information is supported allowing

Author: My understanding is that the Java SDK is intending to be strict on what it receives, so malformed events (or attribute values) will trigger exceptions.

It does sound like a cross-cutting SDK concern.

| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- | -- |
| Boolean       | [xs:boolean][xml-primitives] | B |
| Integer       | [xs:int][xml-primitives] | I |
| String        | [xs:string][xml-primitives] | S |
| Binary        | [xs:base64Binary][xml-primitives] | BI |
| URI           | [xs:anyURI][xml-primitives] following [RFC 3986][rfc3986]| U |
| URI-reference | [xs:anyURI][xml-primitives] following [RFC 3986][rfc3986] | UR |
| Timestamp     | [xs:dateTime][xml-primitives] following [RFC 3339][rfc3339] | T |

Each concrete CloudEvent context attribute is represented using an XML element with the following
shape:

``` xml
<Attr n="id" v="XXX-YYY-ZZZ-0000" t="S">
```

where :

* _n_ is the _name_ of the context attribute
* _v_ is the _value_ of the context attribute
* _t_ is the _type_ of the attribute value acording to the _Tag_ defined in the table above.

See section below on special handling for `specversion`

## 2.1 Specification Version

To better support streaming style processing the specification version
(`specversion` context attribute) statement is communicated in an explicit element.

``` xml
<Ver>1.0</Ver>
```

## 3. Data

> The `Data` portion of a CloudEvent is contained is a `<Data></Data>` element and supports

Author: I'm flexible .. it seemed a somewhat easier way to detect the switch from attributes to data, let me noodle on this one.

Binary, Text, and XML Data. Each represention is wrapped in a discriminating element:

### Binary Data

Carried in an element with an expected type of `xs:base64Binary`

``` xml
<Data>
    <Bin>... base64 encoded string ...</Bin>
</Data>
```

### Text Data

Carried in an element with an expected type of `xs:string`

``` xml
<Data>

>     <Txt>Hello World</Txt>

Reviewer: I'm a bit concerned that XML whitespace rules could lose data unless SDK authors are really careful. I suspect we should give a warning here with an example.

Author: Could you clarify - sorry, it really has been that long ;-)

Reviewer: I suspect that string data with a value of "First line\n\n\nFourth line" might end up as "First line Fourth line" after XML whitespace handling. I may be wrong, and it would certainly depend on the XML API being used. Happy to look into it further.

Author: I believe this should be resolved ... the comment is over a year old so if still a concern we can re-create it.

</Data>
```

### XML Data

Carried in an element with an expected type of `xs:any`

``` xml

> <Data>

Reviewer: Out of interest, would this be valid?

```xml
<Data>
  <Xml question="Can I add an attribute here?">
    Prefix
    <Element1>Content</Element1>
    <Element2>Content</Element2>
    Suffix
  </Xml>
</Data>
```

Reviewer: (I can see this being a bit of a pain to represent in SDKs to be honest. It might be simpler to require that the content of `Xml` is exactly one element.)

Author: This shows how long it's been since I did XML Schema's - it was not my intention to support what you described.

I'll do some more digging on the correct schema definition.

    <Xml>
        <SomeElement>
            ....
        </SomeElement>
    </Xml>
</Data>
```

## 4. Envelope

Each CloudEvent is wholly represented as an XML element, the root xml
document element is `<CloudEvent ver="n.n">` with the `ver` attribute
used to define the specification version being followed.

Such a representation MUST use the media type `application/cloudevents+xml`.

The enveloping element contains:

* A set of context attributes.

> * An optional data element.

Reviewer: Any restriction on whether the data element is permitted/required based on the presence of a `<Attr n="datacontenttype" ...>` attribute? (That's something I've found myself wondering in a few places.)

Author: I don't think the other formats make this type of connection especially since that is an optional context attribute, I think it's more of a usage expectation - I'll try and come up with some language.

eg:

``` xml
<CloudEvent ver="1.0" >
    <Attr n="id" v="000-1111-2222" t="S">
    <Attr n="time" v="2020-03-19T12:54:00-07:00" t="T">
    <Attr n="type" v="SOME.EVENT.TYPE" t="S"/>
    ....
    <Data>
        <Txt>Now is the winter of our discount tents...</Txt>
    </Data>
</CloudEvent>
```

## 5. XML Batch Format

In the _XML Batch Format_ several CloudEvents are batched into a single XML
document. The document comprises a list of elements in the XML Format.

> An empty batch is unexpected should and trigger an exception during processing.

Reviewer: Why is that the case here, but not in JSON?

Author: Changed

> Although the _XML Batch Format_ builds ontop of the _XML Format_, it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although the _XML Batch Format_ builds on top of the _XML Format_, it is
```

Author: Ack

| ------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- | -- |
| Boolean       | [xs:boolean][xml-primitives] | B |
| Integer       | [xs:int][xml-primitives] | I |
| String        | [xs:string][xml-primitives] | S |
| Binary        | [xs:base64Binary][xml-primitives] | BI |
| URI           | [xs:anyURI][xml-primitives] following [RFC 3986][rfc3986]| U |
| URI-reference | [xs:anyURI][xml-primitives] following [RFC 3986][rfc3986] | UR |
| Timestamp     | [xs:dateTime][xml-primitives] following [RFC 3339][rfc3339] | T |

Each concrete CloudEvent context attribute is represented using an XML element with the following
shape:

``` xml
<Attr n="id" v="XXX-YYY-ZZZ-0000" t="S">
```

where :

* _n_ is the _name_ of the context attribute
* _v_ is the _value_ of the context attribute
* _t_ is the _type_ of the attribute value acording to the _Tag_ defined in the table above.

See section below on special handling for `specversion`

## 2.1 Specification Version

To better support streaming style processing the specification version
(`specversion` context attribute) is communicated as an attribute of the enclosing CloudEvent
enveloping element.

``` xml

> <CloudEvent specver="1.0">

Reviewer 2: Maybe `specversion` to be consistent with other formats?

### Binary Data

Carried in an element with an expected type of `xs:base64Binary`

``` xml
<Data>
    <Bin>... base64 encoded string ...</Bin>
</Data>
```

### Text Data

Carried in an element with an expected type of `xs:string`

``` xml
<Data>
    <Txt>Hello World</Txt>
</Data>
```

### XML Data

Carried in an element with an expected type of `xs:any`

``` xml
<Data>
    <Xml>
        <SomeElement>
            ....
        </SomeElement>
    </Xml>
</Data>
```

## 4. Envelope

Each CloudEvent is wholly represented as an XML element, the root xml
document element is `<CloudEvent ver="n.n">` with the `ver` attribute
used to define the specification version being followed.

Such a representation MUST use the media type `application/cloudevents+xml`.

The enveloping element contains:

* A set of context attributes.
* An optional data element.

eg:

``` xml
<CloudEvent ver="1.0" >
    <Attr n="id" v="000-1111-2222" t="S">
    <Attr n="time" v="2020-03-19T12:54:00-07:00" t="T">
    <Attr n="type" v="SOME.EVENT.TYPE" t="S"/>
    ....
    <Data>
        <Txt>Now is the winter of our discount tents...</Txt>
    </Data>

> </CloudEvent>

Reviewer 3: ```
<CloudEvent specversion="1.0">
  <id>..</id>
  <time>...</time>
  <type>...</type>
  <data> .. </data>
  ...
</CloudEvent>
```

Reviewer: And to capture the conversation a bit more:

```xml
<cloudevent specversion="1.0">
  <id>...</id>
  <time>...</time>
  <type>...</type>
  <mytimeextension xsi:type=""xs:dateTime>...</mytimeextension>
</cloudevent>
```

Author: you've probably forgotten you commented on this ... I believe my latest changes address these concerns.
